---
layout: post
title: The Ganesh-Shambavi-Murali(GSM) Hypothesis
---
## Introduction

<p style="text-align: justify"> As the human race battles for a crushing solution to end or atleast mutate the SARS-Covid 2 Virus, the pandemic rages on, infecting people across the Globe, at its sweet will, defying medical theories, mathematical models, Epidemiologists’ predictions and Community Medicine Specialists’ hypothesis.
Hence the Virus Pandemic and its spread needs to be understood in the broader sense, viz.a.viz, its origin and its growth and spread, as detailed under. I changed the maximum width.

    i. It is now more or less clear that the Virus has had its origin at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, China.(Source for Virus origin in Wuhan – “Detection of Covid-19 in Children in Early January 2020 in Wuhan, China”) There need not be much more discussion on this point since other theories like the spread of this Virus from the nearby ‘Bat Hills’ of Wuhan and its proximity to Villages are not valid for the simple reason that ‘Bat Havens’ are found everywhere on the Globe, and as seen, there was no such trace of this Virus originating from the other such Bat ‘Hot Spots’. Hence the theory floated by the Chinese that the origin of this parasite is from the Animal Market of Wuhan and not Wuhan is untenable.
    ii. The changing genome sequence of this Virus indicates that the strong probability of Virus being man-made and hence contrived in the Wuhan Institute of Virology(have to find source). The factual pointers in this directions can be related to the eclipsing of the Virologist Dr.Shi by the Chinese Establishment.
    iii. It is the fundamental job of the WHO to study the nature and origin of this so-called Virus and al suggest ways to the Global community of Humans and animals on the measures to counter it and its spread. In the absence of the WHO failing in its duties, the humans across the Globe are now facing this pandemic from the past six months, without a clue of an instant medicinal solution
    iv. In this ghastly background of the enlarging and deepening tentacles of this pandemic, it is pertinent to mention the following points :
    a. The almost certain fact that the Virus originated from WIV indicates that Dr. Shi was very involved in the contrivation  of this particle. Dr.Shi is not available to us to reveal the exact intention and nature of this particle.
    b. There is every possibility that the creation of this Virus was part of a Biological Warfare program charted out by CPC/PLA with the intention of erasing a ‘target population’, when let loose. The ways and means of ‘letting loose’ a load of this Virus is debatable.
    c. The WIV would have also thought of a vaccine, for this virus, as the creator of this parasite.
    d. The WIV would have also thought of control measures of this Virus, in the event of an unlikely outbreak of this Virus, from its Lab.
    e. (From Shambavi) In 2018, after scientist diplomats from the U.S. embassy in Beijing visited the WIV, they were so concerned by the lack of safety and management at the lab that the diplomats sent two official warnings back to the U.S. (Source: https://www.livescience.com/coronavirus-wuhan-lab-complicated-origins.html) 
"During interactions with scientists at the WIV laboratory, they noted the new lab has a serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory,".

    f. The WIV lab, along with researchers in the U.S. and Switzerland, showed in 2015 the scary-good capability of bat coronaviruses to thrive in human cells. In that paper, which was published in 2015 in the journal Nature Medicine, they described how they had created a chimeric SARS-like virus out of the surface spike protein of a coronavirus found in horseshoe bats, called SHC014, and the backbone of a SARS virus that could be grown in mice.
    g. 
    v. The studies/researches on this Virus and pandemic so far by the scientific community has been inconclusive and still in progress. In this background the following points merit attention :
    a. There is a growing consensus in amongst the medical community that this Virus by and large enters a victim’s system through Eyes, nose or mouth.  The Virus seems to transfer itself into these three organs from the air around through bubbles and aerosols or by touch, mostly by hand.
    b. Assuming transmission and entry from the air around into the victim’s three organs is a medical reality,  and if it is to be further presumed that the entry of this Virus from the atmosphere into the three Organs can be prevented by wearing of a N95 mask/normal mask, then the question as to how the eyes are protected from being infected is to be answered yet, as both N95 and normal masks do not cover eyes. Conversely, can it be concluded that there is no aerial transmission hence?   
    c. Surface transmission seems to be a theory in infancy, but in the absence of clarity of the susceptibility of the Eyes to aerosols, it has to be held counter to the point. 
    d. Even during the swab tests, samples are drawn from the mouth and Nose and the Eyes are clearly excluded.
    e. The Nose and mouth have been clearly pointed out as the surfaces of recipient of the Virus..
    f. In the background of Community transmission of this Virus, the role of the Nose and Mouth acquire greater importance in understanding the intensity of the spread. There are instances of the flow of this Virus from a infected person to another, although both were wearing N95 masks, but probably because of the reason that both were together in a Car for a long time and chatting. There are also clear examples of the spread not occurring in a jogging park, although the joggers do not wear masks while jogging, but maintain safe distance.
    g. Judging from the size and susceptibility of the Nose and Mouth to inhaling of this Virus, the doctrine of probability theory suggest that the chances of the Virus entering through the mouth is greater than that of entering through the Nose, in comparison, in any situation of possible community transmission. There is no finding in medical theory, so far, on this point.
    h. It is also empirically proved/accepted that the Virus does not enter a well ventilated place as in comparison to a compressed atmosphere.
    i. Hence, it can be empirically concluded that this pandemic is mainly due to community spread happening due to interaction in a congested place, crowded place, congested and non-ventilated habitats, due to close face-to-face contact combined with heavy breathing and inhalation/exhalation while talking.
    j. A sharp point of thinking in terms of controlling the spread occurs if it can be imagined that no person talks while in close contact with another person, and no person opens his/her mouth while in close contact with another person. Hence, with almost NIL exhalation/inhalation, the probability of transmission through mouth will be reduced drastically, since the probability of transmission/ transfer through mouth is statistically more than that through Nose, when it comes to transmission of this Virus in public places, or places involving close contact.   
    k. This holds weight by support of the ancient system of medical practice in India, even now, wherein when a patient enters a Doctor’s Clinic, he or she is not supposed to talk.  
    l. The Nose is designed to inhale and exhale and is equipped with filtering supports, to ward of pathogens. But traditionally, humans do tend to use mouth as an instrument to exhale and inhale, which is not actually the function of the mouth. The mouth, when opened, exposes itself to absorbing of the pathogens around. 
    m. This simple step of not opening the mouth/ shutting the mouth when in outside places will clearly minimise the risk of exhalation of the virus from an asymptomatic covid patient to other potential recipients. Conversely, it will also minimise the risk of accumulation of Covid particles from an infected person nearby, a joint community initiative which will go a long way in controlling the spread of this pandemic.
    n. The scope and probability of a Virus entering a host through the Nose and mouth is diagnosed. For the Covid particle to enter through the Nose, it has rise upwards vertically before it can settle into the mucus of a victim’s nasal layer, a statistical event which looks unlikely, unless there is an upward push given to the Virus at the entry point of the Nose. Further, very hard inhalation is not possible through Nose. As compared, the mouth offers an easy entry point to the Virus, apart from being bigger in accommodating the particles, because of its volume. Again, the mouth offers an easier horizontal entry to the Covid particle. Thus it is clearly striking to notionalise the possible entry method facilitated to the Virus by the human physiology. 
    o. If entry through Eyes is ruled out or is a rare event, then it can be inferred that the entry can be only through Nose or mouth. 
    p. If the transmission is through air droplets or body-to-body, as hypothesised above, the chances of the mouth donning the role of a landing spot for the Virus is very much higher than the chance of the particle entering through the Nose, owing to the difficulties in upward motion posed by the Nose to the predator. The aerosol has to defy gravity in order to enter the inner, upward nasal space, which is unlikely, considering the strong possibility of the aerosol choosing an easier motional way through the nearby mouth, as a host pocket offering a path of least resistance. 
    q. Supposing a situation when the aerosol is in descent and is accosted by a human face, it can be considered that the inhaling Nose affords the aerosol the facility of easy access. However, this point can be countered by the fact that the inhalation would have been preceded by an exhalation, a treatment which would have infact pushed the aerosol farther. 
    r. Masks by themselves cannot protect a potential victim from the invasive particle, since the minute particle can seep through. In the backdrop of a potential victim wearing a mask in public places, the potential victim is more assured of less risk of infection, in the event of he or she not opening her mouth, thereby further reducing the chances of  the particle’s entry through the mouth. 
    s. Even in the case of possible transmission through aerosols or air-bubbles, the predictive theory so far has been that the particle floats in the air out of its own buoyancy before settling down slowly on the ground, unless a potential victim’s face accosts it. Here again the same theory as advanced vide col.p above holds good and the Virus is offered only the mouth as an easier entry point.  
    t. Even assuming the unlikely event of the aerosol entering the system through the nasal tract as a factual reality, the probability of such an event can be safely projected as tending to 0.5 with the remaining probability figure of 0.5 attributable to contracting the aerosol through mouth, with the Eyes having an almost zero rate of infectivity. 
    u. As discussed above, there is unequal and varying chance of a Covid particle entering through the potential three entry points- the Eye, Nose and Mouth.  
    v. By the above analysis, and by appealing to the theory of probability, under the assumption that the probability of entry through eyes is almost surely zero, though may not be actually zero, giving a small margin for entry through Eyes by rubbing of a carrier finger on the eyes. Which leaves the entire balance probability of occurrence of transmission through Nose and mouth, which combinedly tend to be almost surely One, if not One. Between  Nose and Mouth, as argued out above, the probability of transmission through Mouth is much higher than the probability of  transmission through Nose, which arrives at the probability of the transmission through Mouth a more sure event than compared to the probability of transfer through Nose which is a relatively less surer event. 
    w. Thus the ‘mantra’ of effectively closing the mouth while in public places is likely to comprehensively limit the entry of the Covid particle into a Human’s physiological system. 

Shambavi : 

    1. Ocular(eye) transmission is a very definite possibility, as shown in the paper: “2019-nCoV transmission through the ocular surface must not be ignored”. A small proportion of patients are found to have conjunctivitis. However there are opposing papers which argue that there is insufficient evidence shown in that paper, as not all patients with covid-19 showed a positive test for SARS‐CoV‐2 nucleic acid in the eye.
    2. The paper “The possibility of COVID‐19 transmission from eye to nose” speculates that the covid-19 virus enters the eyes through droplets, which then passes into nasolacrimal ducts and finally into the respiratory tract. Hence it is recommended that healthcare personal wear safety goggles. 
    3. Conjunctival epithelium tissue in humans is easily contaminated by droplets and fluids. As a consequence, ocular infections, and thus respiratory infections are possible. 
    4. SARS-COV-2 may have specific affinity to the olfactory(nose) epithelium, and may lead to infection in the early stages in the Central nervous system. This route is already well known for influenza, and other similar virus diseases. Symptoms such as nausea, headache, and vomiting are in fact CNS symptoms. This ultimately induces neurological diseases. This information is present in “Pathophysiology of the COVID-19 – entry to the CNS through the nose”
    5. Origin Story of Covid-> One of the most prominent journals in the fields has this to say regarding origin of COVID in WIV: 
    a.  "This origin story is not currently supported at all by the available data," said Adam Lauring, an associate professor of microbiology, immunology and infectious diseases at the University of Michigan Medical School. 
    b. In that Nature medicine study — one of the strongest rebukes of this idea — Kristian Andersen, an associate professor of immunology and microbiology at Scripps Research, and his colleagues analyzed the genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 and coronaviruses in animals. They found that a key part of SARS-CoV-2, the spike protein that the virus uses to attach to ACE2 receptors on the outsides of human cells, would almost certainly have emerged in nature and not as a lab creation. 
    c. "This analysis of coronavirus genome sequences from patients and from various animals suggests that the virus likely arose in an animal host and then may have undergone further changes once it transmitted and circulated in people," Lauring told Live Science.
    d. "you can't answer this question through genomics alone," said Dr. Alex Greninger. That's because it's impossible to definitively tell whether SARS-CoV-2 emerged from a lab or from nature based on genetics alone. For this reason, it's really important to know which coronaviruses were being studied at WIV. "It really comes down to what was in the lab," Greninger told Live Science.


Murali:
    1. Reported in a recent Nature Medicine article, the two viral-entry proteins that COVID-19 virus uses to get into our body is present in large concentration in our nose (goblet cells and ciliated cells) and also traces have also been in our eyes. This makes them to be two of the prime entry points for the virus.  
    2. The same cells (ACE2 and TMPRSS2 genes) were also found to be present in digestive tract, which could be the pathway that the virus takes when it enter the body through the mouth. 
    3. This suggests that even though there are several physical factors discussed above that make it difficult for COVID particles to enter through our nose, once there it is very easy for COVID particles to infect the body. The study also suggests that nose appears to be better at spreading COVID-19 than mouth. 
    4. Not wearing masks properly and exposing the nose would be very detrimental as this allows particles to enter via the nose and while exhaling through the nose a high concentration of infectious air is generated. 
    5. The study conducted in Hubei Province, China (https://www.ajmc.com/view/covid19-may-be-transmitted-through-the-eye-report-finds) shows that COVID-19 may be transmitted through the eye.  From the data analyzed from 38 patients infected with COVID-19 from Hubei Province, China, 12 individuals had occular manifestations of the disease. The study also found COVID-19 on 2 of the 11 patients for SARS-CoV-2 via nasopharyngeal swabs.
    6. This means that there is a non-zero probability that COVID-19 can get transmitted through the eyes, even if its is pretty small when compared to mouth and nose.
    7. All this being said, the current evidence suggests that COVID-19 transmission is predominantely through close, unprotected contact and chances of getting infected due to airborne transmission is very less. According to WHO reports summarizing the 75,465 cases in China non were through airborne transmission. Therefore by following the social distancing protocol and maintaining a physical distance of 6ft it is possible to avoid being infected. 
    8. If that is not possible, wearing masks and other protective gears to minimize external droplets from coming into contact with our mouth and to limit talking while in a crowded environment will help a long way. 
    9. Studies show that the half lives of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 were similar in aerosols with the median estimate being 1.1-1.2 hours. Therefore avoiding crowded environments would be highly encouraged or to atleast keep time spent on  crowded environment to a bare minimum.

</p>
